Paper...entiment Analysis of Twitter Data for Predicting Stock Market
Movements by Venkata Sasank Pagolu et. al. - published in 28th October
2016

Abstract

1. Now-a-days social media is perfectly representing the public sentiment and opinion

about current events

2. The paper aims to observe how well the changes in stock prices of a company, the
rises and falls, are correlated with the public opinions being expressed in tweets about
that company

3. The paper has employed two different textual representations: Word2Vec and N-

grams

4. The overall objective of the paper is to analyse the correlation between stock market
movements of a company and sentiments in tweets. A simple intuition is that positive
news and tweets in social media would encourage people to invest in the stocks of
that company, resulting in an increase in the stock price of that company

5. The result shows that there is a strong correlation between the rise and falls in stock

prices and the public sentiments in tweets

 Specifically, there is a strong correlation between twitter sentiments and the

next day stock prices!

6. The keywords used for extracting tweets are very important to accurately capture the

public opinions/emotions of a particular stock

Related work

1. Most well-known publication is Bollen

Investigated whether the collective mood states of public (derived from twitter
feeds) are correlated to the value of Dow Jones Index. They used Fuzzy NN for
their prediction

 Their results show that there is a strong correlation between public mood

states in twitter and the Dow Jones Index

2. Chen and Lazer

 Derived investment strategies by observing and classifying the twitter feeds

3. Zhang

 Found a high negative correlation between mood states and Dow Jones

Average Index

4. Brian et. al

Investigated the correlation of sentiments of public with stock increase and
decreases using Pearson correlation coefficient for stocks

Sentiment Analysis

1. Tweets are classified as positive, negative, and neutral
2. Feature extraction

 N-gram representation

o Break down tweets into n-grams, where n denotes the length of the

word sequence

o For example, "Microsoft is launching a new product"

o A 3-gram word features would be "Microsoft is launching", "is

launching a", "launching a new", and "a new product"

o N-grams for all the tweets form the corpus
o Therefore, tweet is split into N-grams and the features to the model
are a string of 1s and 0s where 1 represents the presence of that N-
gram of the tweet in the corpus

 Word2vec representation

o Mapping words to 300-dimensional vector representations
o Vectors of words can be summed up to yield a resultant vector for

any given collection of words

o Relationships between the words is retained in this vector form
o For example, the word vectors difference between Rome and Italy is

very close to the different between vectors of France and Paris

3. Model training

 Used random forest algorithm
 The model trained with word2vec is chosen because of its sustainability of

meaning and promising performance over large datasets

Correlation analysis of price and sentiment

If the previous day stock price is more than the current day stock price, current
day is marked with 0, else marked with 1

 This makes the correlation analysis a classification problem
 The total positive, negative, and neutral sentiments in a 3-day period are
calculated successively which are used as features for the classifier model and
output the next day value of stock: 0 or 1

Results

1. Sentiment analyser results

2. Stock price and sentiment correlation results

 The classifier results show an accuracy value of 69.01% when trained using

Logistic regression

 LibSVM model gave a result of 71.82%
 These results show a good correlation between stock market movements and

the sentiments of public expressed in twitter

Conclusion

1. There is a strong correlation exists between rise/fall in stock prices of a company to

the public opinions or emotions about that company on twitter

Future work

1. Explore other social media platforms. For example, Stocktwits is a financial

communication platform designed solely for sharing ideas and insights of investors

