Paper 13 | Approaches for Sentiment Analysis on Twitter: A State-of-Art
study by Harsh Thakkar et. al - published in 2015

Abstract

1. This paper discusses the state-of-art sentiment classifiers that were applied to analyse
Twitter, which involves surveying various lexical, machine learning and hybrid
approaches

Background

1. The research on sentiment analysis has mainly focused on two things:

 Subjective vs Objective
 Polarity (positive vs negative) of subjective texts

2. Sentiment extraction is employed on Twitter posts using the following techniques:

 Lexical analysis
 Machine learning based analysis
 Hybrid analysis

3. Lexical analysis

 Governed by the use of a dictionary consisting pre-tagged lexicons
 The input text is converted to tokens by Tokeniser
 Every new token is match for the lexicon in the dictionary
 A positive sentiment match, then score is added to the total score for the input

text and vice versa, a negative match will lead to decrease in the total score

 The classification of a text depends on the total score it achieves
 The accuracy of this approach seems to rely heavily on the different lexicons
dictionary being used. Also, the performance of this approach degrades
drastically with the exponential growth of the size of dictionary

4. Machine learning analysis

 Mostly supervised learning techniques
 Five stages:

i. Data collection
ii. Pre-processing (cleaning) data
iii. Finalise training data (adding special features)
iv. Training classifiers (classification)
v. Accuracy, performance tuning and predictions

In this approach, the key to accuracy is the selection of appropriate features.
This approach faces the challenges of designing a classifier, availability of
training data, and the correct interpretation of an unforeseen phrase

5. Hybrid analysis

 Combining the accuracy of a machine learning approach with the speed of

lexical approach

Summary

1. Comparison of all approaches has showed that best results have been observed from
machine learning approaches and least by lexical approaches. However, without any
proper training of a classifier, the machine learning approach results may deteriorate
drastically

Conclusion

1. Machine learning approaches have been good in delivering accurate sentiment results
2. Lexical approach is a ready-to-go and doesn't require any prior information or training
whereas machine learning requires a well-designed classifier, huge amount of training
data sets and performance tuning prior to deployment

3. Hybrid approach has shown great performance too although their performance seems

to be worse on trigrams

